Research experience & Publications
================

Since the earliest steps of my education, I have been fascinated by
basic research on virology and evolutionary biology, later in my career,
I found out that the development and application of computational
methodologies is of great help to answer questions on the intersection
of these fields.

As a summary of my academic experience, during my master thesis in
Dr. Clara Bermudez’s laboratory, I conducted computational analyses on
small-RNAs dataset derived from multiple time-points of Dengue viral
infected humans cell lines. In this project, I characterized
Dengue-induce expression induction of miRNAs
\[[1](#ref-alvarez2019dengue)\] and tRNA-derived fragments -a set of
ncRNA molecules that required the development of new computational tools
for their proper characterization. Specifically, I developed a
bioinformatics tool called
[NBlockTester](https://github.com/AimerGDiaz/NBlockTester)
\[[2](#ref-gutierrez2024systematic)\] to distinguish the expression of
small RNAs from background noise in the ncRNA source.

<div style="text-align: center;">

<figure>
<img src="images/Final_grid.png" style="width: 60%;
height: 60%"/>
<figcaption style="margin-top: 10px;">

<strong>NBlockTester: tRNA-derived fragments detection</strong>

</figcaption>
</figure>

<a name="NBlockTester"></a>

</div>

More recently, before beginning my Ph.D. in Sweden, I had the
opportunity to work as visiting research in two laboratories. First in
the Dr. Erich Grotewold lab, I worked with transcriptomic and small
RNA-seq data to characterize a synergistic effect driven by the
interfering role of trans-acting small RNAs in the regulation of
specialized metabolism genes in *Arabidopsis thaliana*
\[[3](#ref-jiang2020synergy)\]. My second visiting research experience
was in Dr. Adami’s lab, where I investigated the evolutionary
persistence of a unique type of small ncRNAs found in *Trypanosome
brucei* mitochondria, called guide RNAs. These molecules not only play a
role in RNA editing of mRNAs but may also function as a mutational
robustness system that protects the mitochondrial genome during severe
and periodic bottlenecks.

<div style="text-align: center;">

<figure>
<img src="images/synergy.png" style="width: 100%;
height: auto"/>
<figcaption style="margin-top: 10px;">

<strong>Flavonoid flux maps displaying synergy effect between
anthocyanin and RDR6/SGS3/DCL4 siRNA pathway</strong>

</figcaption>
</figure>

<a name="synergy"></a>

</div>

Lastly, In collaboration with [David
Salcedo](https://drtakuomics.github.io/) at David Smith’s lab, I
co-developed the ProEnd database, which analyzes HbYX motif-containing
proteins across all life proteomes, of course including viruses
\[[4](#ref-salcedo2024proend)\]. Our work has focused on exploring the
evolutionary and functional diversity of these motifs, particularly in
relation to proteasome regulation. Through this collaboration, we have
integrated bioinformatics approaches with experimental validation,
identifying novel candidates that may expand the known roles of
HbYX-like sequences.

<div style="text-align: center;">

<figure>
<img src="images/Proend20S.png" style="width: 100%;
height: auto"/>
<figcaption style="margin-top: 10px;">

<strong>Proend: 20S structural interacting HbYX motif detection</strong>

</figcaption>
</figure>

<a name=""></a>

</div>

# Scientific publications

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body">

<div id="ref-alvarez2019dengue" class="csl-entry">

1\. Álvarez-Dı́az DA, Gutiérrez-Dı́az AA, Orozco-Garcı́a E, Puerta-González
A, Bermúdez-Santana CI, Gallego-Gómez JC. Dengue virus potentially
promotes migratory responses on endothelial cells by enhancing
pro-migratory soluble factors and miRNAs. Virus research.
2019;259:68–76.

</div>

<div id="ref-gutierrez2024systematic" class="csl-entry">

2\. Gutierrez-Diaz A, Hoffmann S, Gallego-Gómez JC, Bermudez-Santana CI.
Systematic computational hunting for small RNAs derived from ncRNAs
during dengue virus infection in endothelial HMEC-1 cells. Frontiers in
Bioinformatics. 2024;4:1293412.

</div>

<div id="ref-jiang2020synergy" class="csl-entry">

3\. Jiang N, Gutierrez-Diaz A, Mukundi E, Lee YS, Meyers BC, Otegui MS,
et al. Synergy between the anthocyanin and RDR6/SGS3/DCL4 siRNA pathways
expose hidden features of arabidopsis carbon metabolism. Nature
communications. 2020;11:2456.

</div>

<div id="ref-salcedo2024proend" class="csl-entry">

4\. Salcedo-Tacuma DM, Howells G, McHose C, Gutierrez-Diaz A, Smith DM.
ProEnd: A comprehensive database for identifying HbYX motif-containing
proteins across the tree of life. bioRxiv. 2024;2024–06.

</div>

</div>
